.TH ASCII2MSEED 1 2017/04/03
.SH NAME
ASCII time series to miniSEED converter

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
ascii2mseed [options] file1 [file2 file3 ...]

.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBascii2mseed\fP converts simple ASCII time series data to miniSEED
format.  If an input file name is prefixed with an '@' character the
file is assumed to contain a list of input data files, see \fILIST
FILES\fP below.  All output miniSEED records will be written to a
specified output file.

.SH OPTIONS

.IP "-V         "
Print program version and exit.

.IP "-h         "
Print program usage and exit.

.IP "-v         "
Be more verbose.  This flag can be used multiple times ("-v -v" or
"-vv") for more verbosity.

.IP "-S         "
Include SEED blockette 100 in each output record with the sample rate
in floating point format.  The basic format for storing sample rates
in SEED data records is a rational approximation
(numerator/denominator).  Precision will be lost if a given sample
rate cannot be well approximated.  This option should be used in those
cases.

.IP "-r \fIbytes\fP"
Specify the miniSEED record length in \fIbytes\fP, default is 4096.

.IP "-e \fIencoding\fP"
Specify the miniSEED data encoding format, default is 11 (Steim-2
compression) for integer data and 4 for floats (stored uncompressed).
Other supported encoding formats include 10 (Steim-1 compression), 1
(16-bit integers) and 3 (uncompressed 32-bit integers).

.IP "-b \fIbyteorder\fP"
Specify the miniSEED byte order, default is 1 (big-endian or most
significant byte first).  The other option is 0 (little-endian or
least significant byte first).  It is highly recommended to always
create big-endian SEED.

.IP "-o \fIoutfile\fP"
Write all miniSEED records to \fIoutfile\fP, if \fIoutfile\fP is a
single dash (-) then all miniSEED output will go to stdout.  All
diagnostic output from the program is written to stderr and should
never get mixed with data going to stdout.

.SH LIST FILES
If an input file is prefixed with an '@' character the file is assumed
to contain a list of file for input.  Multiple list files can be
combined with multiple input files on the command line.  The last,
space separated field on each line is assumed to be the file name to
be read.

An example of a simple text list:

.nf
tspair.ascii
slist.ascii
.fi

.SH ASCII DATA
The input ASCII data are expected to start with a simple header
followed by data samples in one of two forms: a columnar sample value
listing or time-sample pairs.  The columnar sample value listing may
have 1 to 8 columns.  The header identifies the time series source
parameters (SEED convention) along with number of samples, sample
rate, time of first sample, sample list format, sample type and
optionally the units of the samples.

Header lines are of the general form:

.nf
"TIMESERIES SourceName, # samples, # sps, Time, Format, Type, Units, Headers"
.fi

Header field descriptions:

.nf
\fBSourceName\fP: "Net_Sta_Loc_Chan_Qual", no spaces, quality code optional
\fB# samples\fP:  Number of samples following header
\fB# sps\fP:      Sampling rate in samples per second
\fBTime\fP:       Time of first sample in ISO YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.FFFFFF format
\fBFormat\fP:     'SLIST' (sample list) or 'TSPAIR' (time-sample pair)
\fBType\fP:       Sample type 'INTEGER' or 'FLOAT' or 'FLOAT64'
\fBUnits\fP:      Units of time-series, optional (will not be present in miniSEED)
\fBHeaders\fP:    miniSEED header values and flags, optional
.fi

The header line should not be wrapped and must contain the spaces and
commas as specified in the general form.  The units field of the
header is optional and will not be used by ascii2mseed (there is no
place for units in miniSEED).  No blanks lines should exist between
the header and data samples.

The \fBSourceName\fP field identifies the source of the time series
data using the SEED name nomenclature separated by underscores.  The
data quality code is optional and defaults to 'D'.  Spaces in the
source name field are not supported.

The \fBType\fP field identifies the expected value data type.  The
type instructs the converter to parse the data values with the
following mapping: \fBINTEGER\fP => 32-bit integer, \fBFLOAT\fP =>
32-bit float and \fBFLOAT64\fP => 64-bit float (double).

More than one data segment (header and associated data samples) may be
contained in any given input file.

\fBExample data file using SLIST (sample list) format\fP

.nf
TIMESERIES XX_TEST__BHZ, 12 samples, 40 sps, 2003-05-29T02:13:22.043400, SLIST, INTEGER, Counts
      2787        2776        2774        2780        2783        2782
      2776        2766        2759        2760        2765        2767
.fi

\fBExample data file using TSPAIR (time-sample pair) format\fP

.nf
TIMESERIES XX_TEST__BHZ, 12 samples, 40 sps, 2003-05-29T02:13:22.043400, TSPAIR, INTEGER, Counts
2003-05-29T02:13:22.043400  2787
2003-05-29T02:13:22.068400  2776
2003-05-29T02:13:22.093400  2774
2003-05-29T02:13:22.118400  2780
2003-05-29T02:13:22.143400  2783
2003-05-29T02:13:22.168400  2782
2003-05-29T02:13:22.193400  2776
2003-05-29T02:13:22.218400  2766
2003-05-29T02:13:22.243400  2759
2003-05-29T02:13:22.268400  2760
2003-05-29T02:13:22.293400  2765
2003-05-29T02:13:22.318400  2767
.fi

.SH MINISEED HEADER VALUES

The following miniSEED header values may be set in the TIMESERIES
header line:

.nf
FSDH:ACTFLAGS:bit=value
FSDH:IOFLAGS:bit=value
FSDH:DQFLAGS:bit=value
B1001:TIMINGQUALITY=value
.fi

The Fixed Section Data Header (FSDH) flag sets are single bytes where
each bit is a flag.  The Blockette 1001 (B1001) timinig quality value
should be set from 0 to 100 percent.  For details see the SEED format
manual.

Multiple values may be specified by concatinating the declarations
using vertical-bar delimiters.  For example: "FSDH:IOFLAGS:5=1|B1001:TIMINGQUALITY=100".
This composite value would be specified in the header like so:

.nf
TIMESERIES XX_TEST__BHZ, 12 samples, 40 sps, 2003-05-29T02:13:22.043400, SLIST, INTEGER, Counts, FSDH:IOFLAGS:5=1|B1001:TIMINGQUALITY=100
.fi

The example above sets bit 5 of the IO flags (Clock locked) and sets the timing quality value of Blockette 1001 (Timing quality) to 100%.

.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Chad Trabant
IRIS Data Management Center
.fi
